Previously...
She hexed Jamie and turned him
away from me.
She put an ill-wish under my bed.
And then tried to seduce my husband!
Sire! This woman is a liar and a witch.
But La Dame Blanche is a white witch,
and I practice white magic.
And with French money,
we will unite the clans,
and I will lead you all
to the gates of London.
And to glory.
The prince is a canny, slippery man,
yet can fool good men to
believe he's God's chosen one.
We have thwarted him all we can.
We may find ourselves
staring into the abyss awaiting us
at the bottom of Culloden Moor.
Bring me home.
- To Scotland.
- Aye.
Scotland.
We returned to heal in the peace
of the Scottish Highlands.
Jamie's sister, Jenny,
and her husband, Ian,
had had another baby
while we were in Paris.
Their welcome and the daily
routines of Lallybroch
worked like a tonic on our battered souls.
We hoped we had done enough
to stop the war.
We began planning our future,
but as a very prescient Scot
once observed,
"the best laid schemes of mice and men."
Claire, Claire! They're ready!
Look how big they are!
They're giant!
Oh, my goodness, Rabbie.
So they are.
Can we eat them tonight?
I don't see why not.
Come on, let's go ask Mrs. Crook.
A grand potato, if ever I saw one.
Ye've never seen one.
Not in Fraser land.
Not till now.
Ye were right tellin' us
to plant them, Claire.
'Tis a fine crop.
I dinna see how ye'd
ever grind them for parritch.
I dinna believe ye grind them, Mrs. Crook.
Och, aye?
What do ye do with 'em, then?
You boil them.
- Eat them with salt.
- Aye.
- Butter is good, too.
- Or roast them.
Or you can mash them with milk.
I dinna ken you could cook, Sassenach.
I'm not sure I can cook,
but I can certainly boil a potato.
Then we shall have a feast.
- Ye did well.
- Wipe yer feet
and take off yer filthy boots
before ye tramp all over this rug.
Come along, lads.
You can help me scrub them clean.
I ran into Hector on the way up.
Got the post from him.
Jamie, here's one for you.
- Louise.
- It's the bill for the seed.
And one from Aunt Jocasta.
Good, we haven't heard from her in months.
Now, did ye get the plowshare fixed?
Smitty says it's broken straight through.
Canna be re-forged.
We'll have to hand-till
until we can get a new one.
I canna believe I've become a farmer.
Three French novels
and a book of poetry from Paris.
Which one shall we read tonight?
And what is it?
"Dear cousin, so pleased.
Words cannot express my admiration
for your boldness and courage.
My prayers are with you."
- Stuart Crest.
- Aye.
It declares a Stuart's divine right
to the throne of Britain,
supported by the chieftains
of the Highland clans,
signed by those pledging loyalty
to Charles Stuart.
"MacKinnon, Oliphant,
MacDonald of Glencoe...
James Alexander
Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser."
Jesus bloody Christ,
he's forged your signature.
Aye... he has.
Charles has landed in Scotland
and is gathering his army.
This was published, distributed.
The names on this
are traitors to the crown.
Jamie.
It's all coming to pass, isn't it?
Jacobite rising, Culloden, the Clearances.
The destruction of all of this.
So it would seem.
We could go to Ireland, or the colonies.
What of Ian and Jenny?
My nieces, nephews, our cousins?
We can bring them with us.
All of them?
What of our tenants?
Leave them to the mercy
of the British butchers
if the Culloden is lost?
Your name on that document
brands you as a traitor to the British.
And you will be hung as one
if they catch you.
We can't stay.
We know what will happen
if the Jacobites lose the war. But...
But what if they win?
They don't.
It's the verdict of history.
Have you given up trying to change
the future, then, Sassenach?
Well, after Paris, haven't you?
Aye, Paris was bitter disappointment.
But you can change the future.
You've proven that.
Thomas Baxter lives because of you.
Paris was spared an outbreak
of smallpox because of you.
And Louise de Rohan
will bear Charles Stuart's bairn...
because of you.
You want to fight for Prince Charles?
Fight... for our family.
And for Scotland.
Canna see any other way.
Can you?
Not one that we could live with.
They say the definition of insanity
is doing the same thing over and over
and expecting a different result.
Well, I do not ken
who "they" are, Sassenach...
but I'll wager...
"they" have never traveled through time.
So, with Daniel Wallace
and Duncan MacLennan,
ye should have 30 able-bodied men
from Lallybroch.
Good. Murtagh, I'll need ye
to bring the men to Kingussie.
Claire and I will meet you there
in two weeks,
and we'll go together
to join the prince at Crieff.
As ye say.
And where will we be
during these two weeks?
Prince Charles has dispatched me to
enlist men and support from our kinsman,
Lord Simon Fraser of Lovat.
Ye're going to see Lord Lovat?
Ask him to do ye a favour?
Ask him to help preserve his country...
and restore the rightful king
to the throne.
He does have a history
of supporting the Jacobites, ye ken.
Aye, and the British and anyone else
that will help him line his pockets
and claim the title
Chief of Clan Fraser of Lovat.
A position he is entitled to
and has held for over 20 years.
You're defending the old buzzard, now?
Father must be birling in his grave.
Who is Lord Lovat?
Our grandsire.
Who we've laid eyes on
but once in our lives,
when he came to visit
just after our mother died.
Father threw him out before
he could cross the threshold.
Why?
He tried to have our mother kidnapped
and taken to the Monach Isles
in order to prevent our father
from marrying her.
There was some bad blood
between Lovat and the MacKenzies.
A situation I assume
Prince Charles is unaware of?
'Tis not only degrading
for ye to crawl to that man
and ask him for help.
'Tis a fool's errand.
The old fox does nothing
that's not in his best interest
- and never without a price.
- No.
No, what would be foolish, Janet,
would to let pride stand in the way
of doing whatever I can
to save Lallybroch, Scotland,
and everything that we hold dear.
We'll leave for Beaufort Castle
first thing tomorrow.
I havena been completely honest
with ye about my family, Sassenach.
- What do you mean?
- My father...
He was a bastard.
Acknowledged by his father,
Lord Lovat, but...
a bastard nonetheless.
And your grandmother?
Lord Lovat's kitchen maid.
She raised my father at Beaufort Castle.
I should've told ye before we wed.
I'm sorry. It was cowardly of me.
Jamie... you must know
your father's parentage
makes no difference to me.
Well...
it should.
It doesn't.
- Let's go to bed.
- Aye.
The bairn couldna sleep...
and neither could Jamie.
He thought they could keep
each other company for a bit
while Ian and I slept.
And he's trying to get back
on my good side.
Did it work?
It's a start.
Ye can talk to a wee one in a way
you canna talk to anyone else.
Ye can pour out yer heart to them
without choosing your words or...
holding anything back at all.
And that's a comfort to the soul.
It's the way we talk to them
before they're born.
Ye know.
Yes.
I know.
The man has to wait
until the child's born...
and then they hold their bairn and...
feel all the things that might be
and all the things that might never be...
and weep, not knowing
which ones will come to pass.
- Take care of your Fraser.
- Aye.
And you yours.
Take this.
It brought Ian back to me from France.
Ye gave Ian a token when
we went to France, and no' me?
And him not even your betrothed
at the time.
Don't make me regret giving it to ye now.
If ye don't come back, brother,
I'll never forgive ye.
Never... is a very long time.
I know.
Just where do ye think ye're going?
Well, with Milord.
Ye're too young to fight, laddie.
Ye'll bide here wi' us.
You can help Rabbie in the stables
till Milord returns.
But... I belong with you.
Is that not what you told me, Milady,
that I will always have a home with you?
Yes, of course.
- But sometimes, it's...
- He's right.
His place is no' here without us...
nor in France on his own.
Bring him with ye, Murtagh,
when ye come with the men.
Aye.
If I havena killed him first.
Dinna fash, Claire.
We'll keep him well away from the battle.
The outcome is in yer hands, laddie.
A good soldier must learn
to obey his commanding officer...
as well as his general.
Take care of each other.
And watch out for my grandsire.
I will.
Bye, Jenny.
During our ride to Beaufort Castle,
Jamie filled me in
on what he knew of his grandfather.
Over the last 50 years,
Lord Simon Fraser of Lovat
had been alternately loyal
to both the exiled King James
and the monarchs sitting
on the British throne.
His personal life was equally infamous.
Aside from numerous
extramarital dalliances,
Lord Lovat had had three wives,
two of them acquired by nefarious means.
Lord Lovat will be with you shortly.
I do wish we'd had a chance
to freshen up a bit
before meeting your grandfather.
Dinna fash, Sassenach.
You look bonny...
though ye do have a few
teasel heads in your hair.
Leave 'em. They suit her.
Colum.
I arrived this morning, myself.
I saw ye enter the courtyard
from the window.
What are ye doing here?
Well, I'm here to discuss a response
to the rebellion with Lord Lovat...
as I assume you are.
War.
It makes for strange bedfellows.
I'm pleased to see that ye're well.
You'll have to excuse me
if I find that hard to believe.
The witch trial, Colum.
Ye seem to be implying that I...
I had something to do
with your involvement in that.
It is my impression that ye were
simply in the wrong place
at the wrong time.
Yes, I was.
Thanks to a message from
your kitchen maid, Laoghaire,
who just happened to know the exact
time and place of the arrest.
A gross overstepping of her place,
for which I had her beaten.
I would've thrown her out of Leoch,
but her grandmother, Mrs. Fitz,
persuaded me she could
keep the girl in check.
Is Dougal with ye?
No.
It became clear that
it was best for the clan
that my brother remain at his own estate.
But surely Dougal would be
the one leading clan MacKenzie
in fighting for King James?
I'd forgotten what
a curious mind you have, lass.
So the rumor is true.
The grandson of Lord Simon Fraser of Lovat
has bound himself to a Sassenach.
But I suppose ye are
yer father's son, after all.
Who's to expect the boy
to have more sense choosing a wife
than did the bastard who made him?
At least I had no need to take a wife
by means of rape or trickery.
No' as serious as yer father.
Good.
Enough breath wasted on a woman.
Leave us.
It's time to talk politics
with my grandson and my rival.
While Jamie's meeting dragged on,
I took the opportunity to look over
the place Lord Lovat called home.
Mistress Fraser?
I've been looking for ye
since I heard you were here.
Laoghaire.
Did the laird not tell ye I was with him?
- No.
- My grandmother sent me along
to wash his laundry
and help wherever I'm needed.
I wanted to find ye, though, because...
I need to tell you.
I am changed.
And I am sorry beyond measure
for the horrible wrong I did to ye.
My grandmother has made me see
I canna be right with God
until I make amends
for the pain my evil actions have caused.
I believe it is God brought us
together here so I could do so.
God?
You speak of God?
How often have I thought about what
I would do whenever I saw you again?
I have fantasized
all manner of violent acts
that I would subject you to.
To all of them.
Ending with lighting the pyre
beneath your feet...
and dancing on your ashes
as you promised to dance on mine.
I don't hate you, Laoghaire.
I pity you.
The dark places you must've inhabited...
in the hopes of getting something
that you'll never have.
As for getting right with God...
you'll just have to find another way.
'Cause I can't help you.
Maybe God did bring us together.
Somehow, I... I feel lighter.
Ye're more forgiving than I am, Sassenach.
I wouldna give that brazen besom
the time of day.
Perhaps.
So, will I be allowed
to join you at dinner tonight?
Aye.
Aye, my grandsire's no' opposed to
a bit of decoration at the dinner table.
As long as that decoration doesna speak.
Aye.
Just like that.
Now, come along.
Every man here knows
that to most British...
all Highlanders,
no matter their allegiance...
we're all the same.
Savage dogs better put down than let live.
And after three uprisings,
the British Army will be motivated
to put us down for good.
To save our clans, our country,
our very way of life...
we must band together under
the true king, King James. Fight.
And we must win.
We're very fortunate to have among us
such a close confidant of the prince.
Isn't that so, Lovat?
We're lucky to have somebody
to give us an inside view
of this holy rebellion.
Aye, but I dinna know how holy it is.
So can you tell us, then, nephew,
how much support have the French
agreed to give?
The French have already
supported us, Colum...
by engaging the British Army in Flanders,
reducing the troops
remaining here at home.
The prince is certain the French
will want to press the advantage,
send men and artillery
to support the Jacobites.
So the French have not yet
committed to Prince Charles?
Always an unreliable ally, the French.
We will welcome the French support
when it comes, but we dinna need it.
The Jacobite army is already
1,000 men strong in Crieff.
MacDonalds, Camerons, Stuarts, and Grants.
And more joining every day...
while the majority of the British Army
remains on the continent
licking their wounds.
I have heard the British
have offered £30,000
for the capture of Prince Charles.
Meaning what?
Meaning the British
see Prince Charles as a real threat.
Ye'll join us then, cousin?
Perhaps the British know,
as the rest of us do,
how many cullions there are amongst
the Campbells and the Camerons,
men who would sell their own
grandmothers for half that amount.
Aye.
- Well, I...
- For £30,000,
the British could end this
rebellion before it even starts.
A fair sight less than it would
cost them to wage a war.
I hadn't considered that.
Then sit down,
ye mealy-mouthed wee smout,
and dinna speak again
until ye have considered
what ye're about to say.
Bring us more wine...
my lovely.
And a glass of milk for my boy.
Enough war talk tonight.
You know, I got the impression
that Colum was trying to use you
to convince Lord Lovat
not to join the rebellion.
Aye.
The first Jacobite rebellions failed,
and Colum will never support another.
He wants Lovat's clan to stay
neutral with the MacKenzies,
knowing that the smaller clans
will follow...
and the rebellion will collapse
before it ever gets started.
Well, why doesn't Colum
just speak to him directly?
Because my grandsire
doesna trust my uncle.
Using me is
a much more effective strategy.
I need to speak to Lovat on my own,
without Colum leading me
to make his arguments for him.
It's a pity young Simon
is such a spineless creature.
I believe he could influence
his father's decision
if he took a strong stance for our side.
The man has nothing but contempt
for the poor boy.
He's just trying to toughen him up,
make him a viable successor
to lead Clan Fraser of Lovat.
My grandsire had the perfect opportunity
to say no to us tonight, but he didn't.
Perhaps Jenny was right.
He wants something in exchange.
Do ye think ye can toy with me?
Ye're keeping something
from me, ye old hag,
and I'm no' havin' it.
Are you all right?
Here, let me help you.
Thank you, Mistress.
I'm Claire.
Maisri.
Lord Lovat's seer.
Wait.
I'll wager yer father painted
a black portrait of my character.
He said very little about ye.
He chose that MacKenzie whore...
And I'll ask ye to keep a civil tongue
when you speak of my mother!
Over me, his father, twice.
First when I told him not to marry her.
And yer kidnapping attempt failed.
Second time, she was dead and buried.
I was willing to forgive him,
make him my successor,
despite the fact he was a bastard.
And he chose her memory and that place...
Lallybroch.
...over me.
- Is it true?
- What?
That you've no' pledged yer fealty
to Colum MacKenzie?
That's what ye're after, is it?
My fealty to you, in exchange
for sending aid to Prince Charles?
To be honest, I'm more interested
in what goes with it.
What need have ye of Lallybroch?
The tenants' rents would probably
make no difference to a place like this.
What I do with that damnable place
would be no concern of yers.
I'm yer grandsire
and head of your clan, after all.
I demand my due.
If I wouldna give my pledge to Colum,
who I know to be kin,
then what sort of fool would I be
to give it to an old twister
that may or may not share my blood?
You made free with yer housemaids.
Perhaps others did, too.
Christ, laddie!
Implying yer grandmother's a whore
to keep what you want?
Ye're my kin, all right.
Would that my son had half yer mettle...
I'll give ye the same pledge I gave Colum.
My help and goodwill.
And my obedience to yer word,
so long as my feet rest on Lovat soil.
Did ye no' hear me?
It's yer father's precious estate
I'm after.
If ye'll no' give me Lallybroch in
exchange for men for Prince Charles...
how about this?
Lallybroch for yer wife's honor.
Go ahead.
Try to ravish my wife.
And after she's done with ye...
I'll send in the maid
to sweep up yer remains.
Not I, lad, though I've taken
my pleasure with worse.
Your grandmother comes to mind.
But there are many men in Beaufort Castle
who'd be of a mind to put your...
Sassenach wench
to the only use she's good for.
Ye canna guard her night and day.
No.
I needn't worry, Grandsire.
My wife's a rare woman.
Ye ken.
A wise woman.
La Dame Blanche.
"The White Lady."
The Sassenach?
A witch?
Aye, it's true.
The man that takes her in unholy embrace
will have his privates blasted...
like a frostbitten apple.
And his soul...
will...
burn...
forever in hell.
Like that.
My grandsire has a great respect
for the supernatural.
No' for anything else,
but ye should take care
the next few days if I'm no' here.
Well, he didn't seem that frightened
of that poor woman
when he tossed her out into the corridor.
Maisri's but a seer.
She's not a white lady, like my wife.
But she did know something
she wasna telling him.
Your grandfather really is a brute,
isn't he?
Aye. A brute that may soon
own my ancestral home.
You can't be seriously thinking
about giving him what he wants?
Well, the prince will hardly
put much stock
in my abilities to lead men or wage war
if I'm not even able to persuade
my own grandsire to support our cause.
Well, what about young Simon?
What if we persuade him
to stand up to his father...
- declare his support for the rebellion?
- Aye.
Aye, then Lovat may send his men
if only to protect his heir, but...
after that scene last night,
it'll take more time than we have
to give the boy the confidence
he needs to truly defy his father.
Perhaps it depends on what we use
to boost his confidence.
Is that Jamie's shirt?
I've done nothing to it.
Didn't mean to imply that you had.
I have changed, ye ken.
I have repented and asked
God's forgiveness,
and it was working.
I thought he brought you both here
to help me, but it was to test me.
In the great hall,
Jamie didn't even see me.
'Twas like I didna exist.
If ye willna avenge yerself,
ye must leave me be.
Perhaps I could find my way
to forgive you.
- But Jamie...
- Hail Mary, full of grace.
Jamie will never love you, Laoghaire.
But there might be a way
to earn his forgiveness.
For him to think of you without rancor.
And why would you want him to do that?
Because we need Lord Lovat
to send his men and weapons
to fight for Prince Charles,
and we believe he might do this
if young Simon stood up to him
and took Jamie's side.
And what is that to do with me?
Young Simon is infatuated with you.
You could use that to help persuade him.
No.
I'll not sink further
into the pit of depravity.
I'll not give up my maidenhead for you!
No one is asking you to give up anything.
Besides, it's not for me.
It's for Jamie.
A woman has more to offer a man
than her body.
When a man is in love,
he craves his beloved's approval.
He wishes to please her,
and to look heroic in her eyes.
And if I do whatever it is
ye have in mind...
ye'll speak to Jamie on my behalf?
Yes.
I canna tell you how I know,
but I do.
You must believe me.
The only way to survive...
is to fight and win.
And we need the weapons and men to do so.
Remaining neutral will be seen
as treason by whatever side wins.
Ye know? Ye just know?
Ye sound like a madman!
History guides my course in this matter.
History!
Not wild beliefs and wishful thinking.
The other risings,
they failed because
there was no outside support,
and that support does not exist now.
If we do not send men to fight,
this rebellion will melt away.
And when that happens, we will be
left alone, as we were in the past.
Lord Lovat.
He would see that, too,
if only the vengeful prize of Lallybroch
was not dangling in front of his eyes.
And he would agree to neutrality.
Jamie, ye were always headstrong,
but ye were never reckless
with the lives of others.
For yer sake, and for the sake
of all you hold dear...
do not make this bargain with that man.
Do not trade your home
for a war ye canna win.
Will ye promise me that?
I promise you, uncle.
I promise you,
I will do what I must to save those
things you and I hold most dear.
So nice of you to volunteer
to show me the chapel, Master Lovat.
I believe it was yer idea.
It's so peaceful here.
Do you plan to do much
when you become laird?
I've no' given it much thought.
My father's still a vigorous man.
Some have speculated he's immortal.
And as ye may have noticed,
he doesn't have much respect for me.
My husband confided in me
that his father sometimes
exposed him to public scorn,
to make him a better leader of men.
Laoghaire.
I hope we're not disturbing you.
No, Milady.
Just collecting some mushrooms
for the cook.
I'd like a few private moments
in the chapel.
Do you mind waiting here for me?
Well...
if Mistress Laoghaire wouldn't
prefer her solitude...
No, I'd welcome the company.
It's a dreich day.
Aye.
Do you like mushrooms?
Not much, no.
I like poetry.
So do I.
"Though hurricanes rise
and rise every wind,
they'll ne'er make a tempest
like that in my mind.
Though loudest of thunder
on louder waves roar...
that's naething like leaving
my love on the shore.
- To leave thee..."
- Perhaps you'd like to
sit down on the tree.
Maisri.
It's Claire Fraser.
We met in the corridor.
Lord Lovat's tenants
do not like someone like me
in the house of God.
This is the only place
where my mind goes quiet.
I don't know why.
They say you are a "White Lady."
Yes, they do say that.
What brings you into a church, then?
It was cold outside.
I'm glad to see that
you're doing all right.
Lord Lovat was so rough with you
the other day.
His Lordship is not an easy master.
He asks what I see
and beats me when I tell him
things that displease him.
Does it always come to pass,
the things that you see?
Mostly, aye.
Although, sometimes an action
can change things.
When I still lived in the village,
I saw Lachlan Gibbons' daughter's
man wrapped in seaweed,
and the eels stirring beneath his shirt.
I told Lachlan what I'd seen,
and he went straight away
and stove a hole in the boy's boat.
Lord, there was a stramash,
a right to-do.
But when the great storm came
the next week...
three men were drowned,
and that boy was safe at home,
still mending his boat.
What did you see...
right before Lord Lovat threw you out?
I promise, I won't tell him
that you told me.
He was standing there before
the fire in his study,
but it was daylight.
A man stood behind him, still as
a tree, his face covered in black.
And across His Lordship's face,
there fell the shadow of an axe.
But if you told him,
he could change his behavior,
perhaps change the outcome.
Aye.
Or he might just kill the messenger.
Mistress Claire, where are ye?
Mistress Claire?
I'll be right there!
Where is young Simon?
He ran off like a feart wee mouse.
- What did you do?
- Everything ye said.
I flattered him.
I told him how much I admired
a man who made decisions,
who thought for himself.
I gave him a keek down
the front of my dress, I...
I told you it wasn't about sex.
No wonder he ran off.
Well, other than reciting verse,
he wasna doing much to hold up
his end of the conversation.
I tried!
Jamie?
Aye.
I thought I'd find you in here.
More and more these days,
I think I'd prefer to be a beast.
No luck with Colum, then?
No.
And you, with young Simon?
I did find out what Maisri
wouldn't tell Lord Lovat, though.
Aye?
She saw his death
at the hands of an executioner.
A traitor's death.
I dinna suppose she mentioned
if the executioner was in the employ
of King George or King James?
No, I'm afraid not.
I promised Colum...
I'd do what I had to,
to save the Highlanders.
So I must.
Jamie, it's too much.
Let's just go to Prince Charles
with the men from Lallybroch.
I canna go to the prince a failure.
It seems I canna get the men from
Lovat without giving him my land.
So, unless yer planning on declaring
yerself a visitor from the future
and describing what will happen
if we dinna fight and win,
then I dinna see I have much choice.
I have had my secretary
prepare a neutrality pact
between the Frasers of Lovat
and the MacKenzies of Leoch.
I have also had him prepare a deed
of sasine for Lallybroch estate.
Assigning the property to me.
Sign it, and ye'll have yer men
for King James.
Don't sign it,
and I'll agree to neutrality
with MacKenzie here.
Which will it be?
Ye'll let this boy
decide the fate of Clan Lovat?
He's not even yer recognized heir.
I have made this decision.
The boy is but an obstacle in my way.
What will it be, obstacle?
Dinna be a fool, Jamie.
I do this to ensure the future
of my family and people.
What are ye staring at?
Claire?
No!
It's another vision.
- Claire.
- Leave her be!
Do no' give me orders about my own wife!
Claire! Claire, Claire.
What did she see?
- Jamie!
- What did ye see, witch?
- Stay back!
- Lovat.
Can you not see this
for the pretense that it is?
Pretense?
You know that she was tried as a witch
by those that dinna understand
the difference between black magic...
and the power of the old ones.
What did she see?
You don't need to answer him, Claire.
She will if she wants
to walk out of this room.
No, it's all right, Jamie.
I saw you...
standing in bright sunlight.
There was a man behind you.
He was wearing a black hood...
shadow of an axe across your face!
Whose man?
Whose executioner?
King James or King George?
I... I don't remember.
The ground...
was covered in white roses.
The symbol of the Jacobites!
No...
Witch! I'll cut out yer tongue!
How dare you thwart me, boy.
You and MacKenzie are fearful old men.
And you're wrong.
My cousin is right.
It's our duty to stand up
for our country and our kinsmen.
I will fight for King James.
I will fight to change
the White Lady's vision.
Even if ye will not.
The Frasers of Lovat...
will stand with the MacKenzies of Leoch.
We will remain neutral in the war.
I wish ye luck, my boy.
Come, MacKenzie, let's drink
to our newly formed alliance.
I'm ready.
Ye did well, young Simon.
I'm proud to be yer kinsman.
And I'll be proud to fight by yer side.
I'll wait for ye outside the gate.
Aye.
So we go to the prince empty-handed.
Well, at least we were able
to save Lallybroch.
Aye.
Go back to yer home and yer family.
I told you, uncle, I canna do that.
Can you not convince him
to listen to reason and go home?
You've known him longer than I have.
What do you think?
I think it's a blessing
that his mother didn't live
to see what a reckless fool she spawned.
Give me your hand.
We must away as well, Claire.
I need to be in Kingussie
by the end of the week.
Wait.
Before we go, there's something
that I need you to do for me.
Aye.
Say thank you to Laoghaire.
"Thank you"?
For what? Not trying to have you
arrested in the last few days?
Please. Do it for me?
I'll explain it all later.
Aye.
I...
I'm told to thank ye.
For what, I dinna ken, but...
Thank you, Laoghaire.
I hope one day I can also
earn yer forgiveness, Jamie.
And yer love.
Let's go.
Who are they?
My father's men.
Come on.
Go. Go on. Come on.
Don't sit there gaping at me,
ye glaiket sumph!
Go see to yer men!
Turning that one into a soldier
will be a greater feat
than beating the British.
What vision do ye have
for me now, White Lady?
I don't understand.
Now it will seem my grandsire
has sent his heir to fight.
The Stuarts will credit Lovat with
supporting King James, should they win.
They canna execute me for treason.
But what about the neutrality agreement?
I trust old Colum MacKenzie is right.
And that will protect me
if the British should win.
What will you say about your son
fighting for the Jacobites?
He's his own man, that one.
Ye saw it yourself last night.
Persuaded others to follow.
I thank ye, White Lady.
I couldna have got it all without ye.
Ye didna get Lallybroch.
Not yet. Aye. Come on!
Please... tell me
I'm nothing like him, Sassenach.
I'm afraid I have seen
a similarly devious turn of mind.
I might have to rethink our agreement
not to lie to one another.
As we put distance between ourselves
and Jamie's loathsome grandfather,
my heart lightened.
We had Lovat's men now.
Jamie would have the prince's favour
and at least the opportunity
to steer the rebellion to victory.
Maisri had said
we could change the future.
Perhaps we already had.